---
title: Operating a Non-Profit Bakery
header:
    image: /assets/images/bakery.jpg
    teaser: /assets/images/bakery-small.jpeg
    caption: Photo by [Ales Krivec](https://unsplash.com/@aleskrivec?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
  
    overlay_filter: 0.5
excerpt: Capacity management in layman’s terms with a fictional story of Walter’s Bakery
toc: true
---

Similar to my previous one about how to “[design a coffee shop](/2021/05/21/coffee-shop.html)”,
 here is one about “operating a bakery.” Unlike the previous article, 
this one contains less technical jargon but more background about the 
characters.

But
 regardless, it highlights the challenges of resource management in a 
large-scale distributed system. If your organization has many resources 
(i.e., storage, compute, etc.), you must distribute them to various 
teams and products. How do you make sure that they are distributed 
fairly and effectively?

In the story today, let’s see how Walter handles these challenges.

# A Childhood Dream

Walter
 Forno was a successful businessman. He worked hard over the years and 
made a good fortune. At the age of 45, Walter was ready to retire.

Sitting
 in the backyard, looking over the sunset over the Pacific Ocean one 
day, he thought he was still young and full of energy, and he wanted to 
do something more meaningful with the rest of his life.

One
 thing that he had been hoping to do was to open a bakery. For one 
thing, he developed a baking habit over the years. He rarely bought 
bread from the market. Most importantly, he loved the smell of the 
yeast. He loved watching the cake slowly rise in the oven.

The
 second reason is more personal. Most people knew Walter as a successful
 and kind businessman. Some closer friends might know that he used to be
 a soldier in his 20s. But rarely would people know that he grew up in a
 poor family in a poor neighborhood. From time to time, he wouldn’t have
 enough to eat.

The
 feeling of continuous hunger is not something that you can describe 
with words. And for years, Walter lived through that. And that was the 
second reason why he wanted to open a bakery. He wanted to open a bakery
 back in his hometown, the city of Beaufort West. He wanted no more kids
 in that little town to experience hunger growing up.

# The Beginning

Before
 it is too late, at age 47, Walter is finally ready. He returns to 
Beaufort West. He purchased an old hat store that was out of business. 
That was how the story started. And that was where Walter began his 
journey in the non-profit bakery. And he decided to call it The Moisson 
Bakery.

![center](/assets/images/the-moisson-bakery.png){: .align-center}

# The Opening

He
 decided to start with baking all by himself. He didn’t hire anyone 
since he wasn’t sure if anybody would like his bread as much as he did. 
He also decided not to charge for it for now. Pricing is complicated. 
Also, his motivation for the bakery was to feed those in need, not to 
make a fortune.

He
 opened the door on May 1st, with the first summer breeze. Words got 
out. People loved The Moisson Bakery. Even though there was only one 
type of bread he was selling now, the artisan sourdough bread. People 
kept coming back, and they brought their friends and friends of their 
friends.

# More Cooks In The Kitchen

He
 soon realized he should hire more cooks, not only to increase 
production but also to provide more variety of products. After all, he 
can only do so much by himself.

He hired Matthew, Lei, and Wajiha before the end of the summer.

Each
 of them specialized in one type of baked goods. For example, Matthew 
took over the sourdough bread that Walter had been making. Lei brought a
 recipe for chocolate cake cookies when she joined. Wajiha suggested 
that she was good at making dark chocolate from raw cocoa. Sure, why 
not? Walter thought, as long as it was tasty. And Walter asked Lei to 
use Wajiha’s chocolate in his cookie as opposed to buying it from the 
market.

As
 time went by, he hired a few more cooks. But he didn’t name any of them
 chefs. He wanted everyone to be equal. Keeping a flat hierarchy may 
help promote ownership and innovation. That’s what Walter kept telling 
the cooks: whatever recipe you developed, try to keep improving it. 
Also, if you need an ingredient that some other cook produced in-house, 
try to use that instead of sourcing from elsewhere. He used Lei’s 
chocolate cookies and Wajiha’s chocolate as an example.

Under the table, he also sneakily considered himself being the chef. But of course, he kept that thought all to himself.

# Bring Your Own Ingredients

Walter’s
 initial motivation for the bakery was not to make a profit. Well, it 
still wasn’t. So he didn’t charge people from The Moisson Bakery. Until 
one day…

The
 Head of the Education Department of Town, Danny, wanted to improve the 
school experience for all elementary students. His idea was to provide 
one free chocolate cake cookie for each student at 3:00 p.m. every 
Monday.

Danny
 showed up at The Moisson Bakery this Friday afternoon to share this 
idea with Walter and ask Walter if it would be possible to prepare the 
chocolate cake cookies starting next week for an experiment. Walter 
could not be happier to hear that and agree right away. That was an 
incredible opportunity to deliver a great impact.

Over
 the years, Walter had developed a habit of writing a year-in-review 
every December to reflect his positive impact on society that year. He 
was so excited about the idea from Danny. He thought that must be a 
highlight he would have to write down for this year.

After
 Danny left, he talked to Lei and Wajiha immediately. As excited as 
Walter, if not more excited, they got to work immediately.

Soon,
 they realized the biggest challenge. They didn’t have enough butter 
left in the fridge. What was worse, they emptied the shelves for a 
couple of nearby stores and still couldn’t have enough.

Walter
 eventually found a friend of a friend who works at a wholesale supplier
 and made an emergency butter delivery for them after Sunday afternoon.

The following Monday, they successfully delivered all the cookies that they promised. What a crazy adventure!

Tuesday
 morning, everyone got together and debriefed on what went wrong last 
week. The initial meeting was planned for 30 minutes, but it goes way 
over time to an hour and a half! But it was a fruitful discussion. 
That’s when The Moisson Bakery developed its first policy:

*“If you need to place an order for a big quantity, then you will have to bring your own ingredients.”*

This is also known as BYOI years later by historians.

# Funding

Before
 Walter knew it, it was already the end of the year. As an old 
tradition, in the early morning of Christmas Eve, he sat quietly in his 
backyard and reflected on what he had achieved over this incredible 
year.

It
 had been a busy and fulfilling year. Early this year, when he decided 
to open a non-profit bakery, he had never anticipated having such a huge
 success.

He
 was also surprised by how occupied he had become. During the years when
 he was still a businessman, he usually ended the year with a lot of 
notes. But not this year. He was so passionate about this work that he 
didn’t take any time off. Let alone writing many notes throughout the 
year. He regretted that a lot.

One
 of the biggest surprises was accounting. He looked at the savings in 
all his bank accounts and did some basic math. Over the last months of 
operation, he had burned through 12.4% of his life savings. Given the 
current burn and anticipated growth rates, he would go bankrupt in 2.87 
years.

![](/assets/images/sad_eggs.jpeg)
*Photo by [Hello I’m Nik](https://unsplash.com/es/@helloimnik?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)*

No way! That would not be acceptable! He intended to open a non-profit organization, but somehow it became a charity.

Funding is needed!

Walter
 reached out to Danny the following day. They developed a close 
relationship with the collaboration this year. Walter is wondering 
whether the government can help fund this non-profit bakery project. He 
explained to Danny that, without external help, The Moisson Bakery would
 not be sustainable.

Danny
 is more than happy to help. The Moisson Bakery had fed so many of the 
poor in the town and brought so much positive energy into the community.

He
 proposed the idea of funding the bakery by the government during the 
town hall meeting the following week. And the proposal gained 
unbelievably wide support.

Walter
 has peace of mind. With backing from the government, he knows he can 
continue operating the bakery until he is too old to walk.

# Normalized Flour

The
 next big challenge was budgeting. How much funding should The Moisson 
Bakery get? What’s more, how should the budget get further distributed 
to each individual?

That was not so much a logistic problem anymore. It was more of a human problem.

The
 Education Department (run by Danny) wanted to continue the happiness 
program of providing chocolate chip cookies to elementary students once a
 week. Evidence showed that it substantially increased the happiness of 
the children, and in return, increased learning efficiency.

In
 the meantime, organizations like the Small Business Bureau (SBB) also 
wanted to provide sourdough bread to their union laborers. They were the
 ones who brought the majority of the tax revenue to the government. And
 they argue that they should also have a fair share of this.

As
 suggested by Walter, a separate organization was founded to handle 
budgeting — the Consumption Evaluation Agency. This way, Walter could 
focus more on what he does best: logistics around making the best baking
 goods for the people.

Moving forward, the Consumption Evaluation Agency was the one that would help decide:

- How much budget was needed each year?
- How many raw ingredients to buy for The Moisson Bakery?
- And most importantly, how to distribute these to different organizations?

They met once per quarter, and their goal was to make decisions for the above accurately and fairly.

To
 continue the spirit of the non-profit from Walter, the Consumption 
Evaluation Agency decided to avoid using dollar amounts for budgeting. 
But instead, they invented a new currency — Normalized Flour.

Actually,
 there is another untold reason. They all hated that Adam kept arguing 
that they brought in two million tax revenue for the town from SBB. 
Therefore they were entitled to get up to two million dollars worth of 
sourdough bread per year for their department.

Using
 normalized flour was inaccurate since flour is not the only thing that 
costs money to operate a bakery. But oh well, life is all about 
tradeoffs, and there wasn’t anything else that was as important as flour
 in a baking business.

# Recipes, Pricing, and Menu

As
 mentioned earlier, pricing is complicated, especially in a non-profit 
organization. In regular business, pricing is about maximizing revenue. 
For The Moisson Bakery, the goal was to break even. They wanted to sell a
 loaf of bread based on how much it cost to make it, not how much 
customers were willing to pay. All these need to be in Normalized Flour 
instead of dollars.

The cost of a loaf of bread is impacted by a lot of factors:

- The raw ingredients (flour, eggs, sugar, yeast, butter, etc.)
- Electricity
- Labor
- Packaging
- Cookwares wear and tear

Of
 course, raw ingredients were one of the most significant contributors 
to the cost. But the other factors could not be neglected easily either.

All these made it a full-time job. Walter hired Reilly Clark.

Reilly
 would talk to each cook and understand their secret ingredients. He 
organized a big cookbook with all the ingredients listed for each 
product type. Reilly guesstimated each product's cost in normalized 
flour (Nf.).

As
 all the cooks were constantly improving their cooking process and 
ingredients, this was a continuous process. The products' prices were 
updated often, and Reilly had been on top of them.

Here is a snippet of the menu:

- Sourdough Bread — 510 Nf.
- Chocolate Chip Cookies — 1010 Nf. per box of 6
- Dark Chocolate Bar — 430 Nf. per 100 gram
- White Chocolate Bar — 620 Nf. per 100 gram
- Chiffon Cake — 1220 Nf.

# Bookkeeping

Walter
 also hired one more person during the summer, Remy Ip. He knew Remy for
 years in his old company, and he was a trustworthy man.

He
 wanted Remy to help him with bookkeeping. Now that we knew how much 
each product cost, Walter wanted to ensure that nobody took more than 
what they were entitled to.

This
 was what Remy helped with every day. He kept track of how much each 
customer took every day. If anyone consumed more than they should, they 
would get kindly turned away by Remy and his two security guards.

In
 the past, without Remy, it was an honor system. Everyone had an 
allocated amount, but there was no guarantee that they would respect 
that. For example, SBB was allocated 150 loaves of bread every day. But 
it would have been fine if they took 250 one day, and no one would have 
noticed. Starting with Remy, everything was on paper.

This
 information that Remy collected was very valuable to the Consumption 
Evaluation Agency too. They can use them to do more accurate budgeting 
planning and ingredient ordering.

# The End of Year Two

Time
 flies, and without realizing it, it came to another Christmas Eve. As 
usual, Walter woke up early in the morning, sitting next to the window 
staring at the light rain outside, with coffee in one hand. Last year 
was terrific, but Walter could never have imagined this year would have 
been even more adventurous.

In a short review, these were what they have achieved at The Moisson Bakery in year two:

- Got funding from the government
- Started a new organization, Consumption Evaluation Agency
- Reilly Clark was hired to manage the cookbook and pricing
- Remy Ip was hired to keep track of consumption
- Left untold in this story, Walter also hired a few more cooks

# New Beginning

Walter
 could not wait for year three to begin. There are still so many 
unsolved problems, and Walter has many ideas he wants to explore.

There
 is a problem with waste. Some are requesting too much. Walter knows 
that some breads are getting molded in some backyards. What kind of 
policy can we put in place so that we reduce the amount of waste without
 causing hunger?

The
 problems could have been much easier if there were an infinite budget 
and unlimited supply of ingredients. But the world does not operate like
 that. Resources are finite, and it will continue to be. How do we make 
sure that we have enough for everybody in need? When there are not 
enough, how do we decide who to prioritize?

There
 are also problems due to unplanned events, such as storms and droughts.
 During those days, people in town would have increased demand. How much
 buffer should we have to handle unanticipated spikes like these?

These
 challenges are real and hard. It is so hard because, a lot of the time,
 it is a human problem, not a math problem. And humans are complicated 
beings. Sometimes, they can be emotional and unreasonable. Walter is 
facing an optimization problem of capacity management, with no optimal 
solution, only trade-offs.

But Walter is more committed than ever. He knows the journey is only 1% finished.

# The End

That’s it for Walter’s story today. Thanks for reading!

Do you also have to manage capacity at your organization? Do you also face similar challenges? What are your approaches?

```
Want to Connect?Feel free to leave a comment below or DM me directly onTwitter.
```